The United States has carried out a
series of strikes against Venezuela,
announcing the capture of Nicholas
Maduro and his wife. Nicholas Maduro
stood in federal court and pleaded not
guilty to narco terrorism charges.
Donald Trump said his military buildup
in the Caribbean and destruction of
civilian boats there was about alleged
drug trafficking.
But following the US attack on
Venezuela, another reason has taken
center stage.
The oil business in Venezuela has been a
bust, a total bust for a long period of
time.
>> Everything that we've seen during his
second administration has been
consistent with his view that the US
energy dominance is key to his agenda.
>> We're going to have our very large
United States oil companies go in, spend
billions of dollars, fix the badly
broken infrastructure, and start making
money for the country.
But one US oil company is already there
and has been for decades.
>> Chevron produces about 25% of
Venezuela's oil today. Is the largest
investor in the oil industry and in the
country.
>> We've been in Venezuela for the last
[music] 100 years. Uh our presence there
we believe is uh important for the local
economy, the regional economy, the
people of Venezuela. This is a story
about the extent to which a US oil
company is willing to go through the
trials and tribulations of geopolitics
[music] in order to stay in a country
that has the world's biggest oil
reserves.
>> Chevron has virtually no competition. It
has no oversight and so it's really a
very unique situation. So how did
Chevron manage to stay in Venezuela when
everyone else left? and what role could
it play in the country's future if Trump
gets his way?
[music]
Venezuela on paper has more than 300
billion barrels of oil or roughly 17% of
the world's known oil reserves. Most of
those reserves are in this vast deposit
known as the Oronokco oil belt. [music]
But there's even more potential
underground.
>> The US Geological Survey estimates that
Venezuela has more than 1 trillion
barrels of oil in place in the Orinoco
Belt. To put it in perspective, the
world until today has consumed about 1.5
trillion. The chances are they are going
to outlast the world's demand for oil.
So effectively, they are limitless.
And here in Venezuela, a forest of oil
dedics grows from the water of Lake
Maraca.
>> The golden age of Venezuelan oil sector
was in the 1940s to late 50s, early 60s.
The bigger players were Exxon and Shell.
But Chevron 2 made a lot of money
basically exporting oil from Venezuela
to the United States.
>> The situation couldn't last forever.
you had these social tensions start to
come into play like in many resource
owning countries around the world where
people started to question are we as the
resource owners benefiting enough from
our oil reserves.
>> In 1960, Venezuela became a founding
member of OPEC, a cartel of oil
producing countries that managed supply
and thus prices. And by the mid70s,
these were skyrocketing. This brought
enormous wealth into Venezuela.
By the end of that decade, its entire
industry had been nationalized into the
company Petroleio Venezuela [music]
known as Pedvesa. People in Venezuela at
that time lived quite prosperous lives.
You had stories of secretaries flying to
Miami for the weekend to go shopping.
You later have beauty pageantss and
things like [music] that that Venezuela
sort of became known for. sort of showy
wealth.
>> Pedvesa became one of the most
successful state-run oil companies, but
there was a limit to how far it could
operate on its own.
>> The government wasn't reinvesting enough
in these oil assets, causing them to be
run down.
>> And remember the Oronoko belt? Those
reserves come with a caveat.
>> Almost all of that oil is just too
heavy, too sludgy to get out of the
ground. In fact, it doesn't move without
some sort of dilluent to allow it to
flow. Unlike say the lighter oil that
comes from Saudi Arabia,
Venezuela at that point really needed
that foreign private investment, a whole
lot of expertise, a whole lot of capital
to get it out of the ground, to process
it, and to get [music] it to market. the
government decided to open up its its
oil industry back to the oil majors
>> and Venezuela was still attractive. Even
today, heavy oil, mainly [music] from
Canada, makes up more than half of US
crude imports.
>> Refiners in the Gulf Coast of Texas and
Louisiana, like Venezuelan heavy oil
because their refineries were optimized
for that type of oil.
In 1998, Ugo Chavez, a former military
officer who had been imprisoned for a
failed coup d'eta, won the presidency.
His victory ushered in a wave of new
state controls.
>> He passed a number of laws in the early
2000s which effectively meant that
Pedvesa, the state-owned oil company,
had to own a majority share in all the
joint ventures across the country. The
two bigger American companies which were
Exxon and Konoo decided to leave the
country to not upset the new terms that
Chavez had imposed and basically they
went into international arbitration.
>> Chevron however took [music] a different
approach.
>> Chevron's Venezuelan business was led by
Ali Masheri who who ran their Latin
American operations. He had a very
strong personal relationship with Hugo
Chavez. This was really the beginning of
of kind of a special relationship
between Chevron and Venezuela that no
other foreign oil company enjoyed. To
give you an idea, 20 years later today,
Konoo is still owed, for example, more
than $10 billion from the awards of
arbitrations.
>> When Hugo Chavez was elected, oil prices
were only $25 a barrel. So while he was
enacting this period of reforms, oil
prices rose up to a record high of $146
a barrel.
>> But the oil revenue was mismanaged and
went into other government spending.
>> Chavez was running deficits of almost
20% of GDP in the middle of a high price
peak.
>> The amount of corruption that quickly
developed, the [music] amount of
mismanagement of the oil industry was
quite dramatic.
This was the situation Nicholas Maduro
inherited when he took office following
Chavez's death in 2013. [cheering]
So the economy was already in deep
trouble and it went into a tail spin. It
basically reached hyperinflation
>> and it remains a persistent problem that
for outside observers is near impossible
to gauge. Bloomberg's cafe k leche index
as the name would suggest tracks just
one item a cup of coffee. Its price has
increased 587%
over the past 12 months.
>> Across the country, people's savings
started to get wiped out. There was huge
economic disarray.
>> This caused a ground swell of protests
domestically.
>> Tens of thousands took to the streets of
Venezuela today demanding that aid be
allowed to flow into the country,
>> which Nicholas Maduro clamped down on
pretty hard.
This shows how Venezuela's contribution
to the world's oil supply dwindled
during this period. Meanwhile, Donald
Trump was in his first term and took a
decidedly hardline approach, backing
opposition lawmaker Juan Guyaido's bid
to take control.
>> Joining us in the gallery is the true
and legitimate president of Venezuela,
Juan Guyaido. Mr. President, [applause]
Trump [music] imposed financial
sanctions in order to exert pressure for
some kind of positive change within the
country.
Initially they did not touch the oil
industry but later Trump heightened
those sanctions. This was a major
problem now for Chevron.
>> But the company managed to preserve its
[music] assets and when Joe Biden became
president even more leniency was granted
and production bounced back. The Biden
administration [music] said, "We're
going to try carrots and sticks to try
to coax Maduro into reversing some of
that democratic backsliding to [music]
hold free and fair elections." One of
those carrots was Chevron.
This helped stabilize the country's
economy.
>> Chevron brings in dollars to the economy
and helps to reduce inflation.
>> [music]
>> That Chevron's been allowed continuous
operations underscores just how central
[music] its presence has become to
Venezuela and the US. Chevron has been
making the argument for years that if it
is forced [music] to pull out of
Venezuela, US adversaries will simply
move right in. And here it's [music]
talking about China, it's talking about
Russia. And this argument has been very
persuasive [music] in some circles in
Washington, which is part of the reason
why Chevron [music] has stayed for as
long as it has. And now all eyes are on
how much it and other oil companies
might be involved [music] in what
happens next. But fully exploiting
Venezuela's oil resources won't be fast,
and there's no clear financial incentive
to [music] do so.
Oil prices actually notched their worst
annual decline since [music] 2020 this
past year. Part of the reason for that
is the over supply in the market right
now. Some analysts estimate [music] it
could take a few months to return
production to above maybe 1 million
barrels a day. But over the long term,
it's going to take upwards of $10
billion a year for a total of maybe 10
years to [music] bring Venezuela back to
its peak production level seen in about
the '7s.
>> [music]
>> Oil companies are no stranger to uh
challenging environments, but [music]
the political instability, the
environmental liabilities,
the really precarious state of the
infrastructure, the crime, it's a very,
very tough place to be.
A big part of what we're all looking to
now find out is whether the Trump
administration will provide concessions
that incentivize these companies to come
back despite their past grievances.
>> We are going to run the country until
such time as a proper transition can
take place.
>> So while the international fallout from
Trump's attack continues and the future
of Venezuela is incredibly unclear,
there is a takeaway. Chevron may be the
player facing the best odds.
>> Like many places in the world, [music]
uh we have to take a long view on our
presence in countries like this.
>> Chevron has is what Wall Street calls an
option value. Now, this is a bit like
putting um one chip on the on the
roulette wheel every single year. And
[music] you may not win this year, you
may not win next year, you may not win
the year after, but at some point you
will win. And when you win, you're going
to win big.
>> [music]